back in 2003 the UK government carried
out the survey and it was a survey that
measured levels of numeracy in the
population and they were shocked to find
out that for every 100 working age
adults in the country 47 of them lacked
level one numeracy skills now level one
numeracy skills that's low end GCSE
score is the ability to deal with
fractions percentages and decimals so
this figure prompted a lot of
hand-wringing in Whitehall policies were
changed investments were made and then
they ran the survey again in 2011 so can
you guess what happened to this number
it went up to 49 and in fact when I
reported this figure in the FT one of
our readers joked and said this figure
is only shocking to 51% of the
population so I preferred actually the
reaction of a school child who said to
me when I presented at a school this
information said raise their hand and
said how do we know that the person who
made that number isn't one of the 49%
either so it clearly there's a numerous
e issue because these are important
skills for life and a lot of the changes
that we want to introduce in this
century involve us becoming more
comfortable with numbers now it's not
just an English problem Oh a CD this
year released some figures looking at
numeracy in young people and leading the
way the u.s. a nearly 40 percent of
young people in the US have low numeracy
now England is there too but so there's
seven countries seven OECD countries
that figures above twenty percent and
that is a problem because it doesn't
have to be that way if you look at the
far end of this graph you can see the
Netherlands and career there in single
figures ok so there's definitely a
numeracy problem that we want to address
now as useful as studies like these are
I think they really
we risk hurting people inadvertently
into one of two categories that there
are two kinds of people those people
that are comfortable with numbers that
can do numbers and the people who can't
and I suppose what I'm trying to talk
about here today is to say that I
believe that that is a false dichotomy
it's not an immutable pairing I think
you don't have to have tremendously high
levels of numeracy to be inspired by
numbers and that that should be the
starting point to the journey ahead and
one of the ways in which we can begin
that journey for me is looking at
statistics now I am the first to
acknowledge that statistics has got
somewhat of an image problem it's the
part of mathematics that even
mathematicians don't particularly like
because whereas the rest of math is all
about precision and certainty statistics
is almost the reverse of that and but
actually you know I was a late convert
to the world of statistics myself if
you'd have asked my undergraduate
professors what two subjects would I be
least likely to excel in a university
that have told you statistics and
computer programming and yet here I am
about to show you some statistical
graphics that I programmed so what
inspired that change in me what made me
think that statistics is actually an
interesting thing it's really because
statistics are about us if you look at
the etymology of the word statistics
it's the science of dealing with data
about the state or the community that we
live in so statistics are about us as a
group not us as individuals and I think
as social animals we share this
fascination about how we as individuals
relate to our groups to our peers and
statistics in this way are at their most
powerful when they surprise us and
there's been some really wonderful
survey carried out recently by Ipsos
MORI
the last few years they did a survey of
over a thousand adults in the UK and
said okay for every 100 people in
England and Wales how many of them are
Muslim now the average answer from this
survey which was supposed to be
representative of the Florida population
was 24 that's what people thought
British people think 24 out of every 100
people in the country a Muslim now
official figures
reveal that figure to be about five so
there's this big variation between what
we think our perception and the reality
is given by statistics and I think
that's interesting what could possibly
be causing that misperception and I was
so thrilled with the study I started to
take questions out in presentations I
was referring to it now I did a
presentation at some Paul school for
girls in Hammersmith I had an audience
rather like this except it was in
comprised entirely of sixth form girls
and I said girls how many teenage girls
do you think the British public think
get pregnant every year and the girls
were apoplectic when I said the British
public think of 15 out of every 100
teenage girls you have pregnant in the
year and they had every right to be
angry because in fact I'd have to have
closer to 200 dots before I could color
one in in terms of what the official
figures tell us and rather like numeracy
this is not just an English problem if
sauce Mori expanded this survey in
recent years to go across the world and
so they are now the Arabians for every
100 adults in your country how many of
them are overweight or obese and the
average answer from the Saudis was just
over a quarter that's what they thought
just over a quarter of adults overweight
or obese the official figures show
actually it's nearer to three courses so
again a big variation and I love this
one they they often in Japan they said
they asked Japanese for every 100
Japanese people how many of them live in
rural areas and that the average again
this is the average was about a 50-50
split just over halfway they sorts 56
out of every 100 Japanese people lived
in rural areas the official figure is
seven so extraordinary variations and
surprising to some but not surprising to
people who've read the work of Daniel
Kahneman for example the Nobel winning
economist him and his colleague Amos
Tversky spent years researching this
disjoint between what people
perceive and the reality the fact that
people are actually pretty poor
intuitive Sat officials and there are
many reasons for this individual
experiences certainly can influence our
perceptions that so too can things like
the media reporting things by exception
rather than what's normal
Carmen had a nice way of referring to
that he said we can be blind to the
obvious so we've got the numbers wrong
but we can be blind to our blindness
about it and then I have enormous
repercussions for decision making so at
the statistics office while this is all
going on I thought this is really
interesting I said you know this is
clearly a global problem but maybe
geography is the issue here you know
these were questions that we're all
about how well do you know your country
so in this case it's okay you know how
well do you know sixty four million
people not very well it turns out you
know I can't do that
so I had an idea which was to think
about the same sort of approach but to
think about it in a very local sense is
this a local if we reframe the questions
and say how well do you know your local
area would your answers be any more
accurate and so I devised a quiz how
well do you know your area it's a simple
web app you put in a postcode and then
it will ask you questions based on
census data for your local area and I
was very conscious in designing this I
wanted to make it open to the widest
possible range of people not just the
49% you can get the numbers I wanted
everyone to engage with it so for the
design of the quiz I used I was inspired
by the ISO types of Auto Noi RS from the
1920s and 30s now these are methods for
representing numbers using repeating
icons and if you like the numbers are
there but they sit in the background so
it's a great way of representing
quantity without resorting to using
terms like percentage fractions and
ratios so here's the quiz the layout of
the quiz is you have your repeating
icons on the left hand side there and a
map showing you the area we're asking
you questions about on the right hand
side there are seven questions each
question there's a possible answer
between 0 and 100 and at the end of the
quiz you get an overall score between 0
and 100
and so because this is TEDx Exeter I
thought we would have a quick look at
the quiz for the first few questions of
Exeter and so the first question is for
every 100 people how many are aged under
16 now I don't know Exeter very well at
all so I had a guess at this but it
gives you an idea of how this quiz works
you drag the slider to highlight your
icons and then just click Submit to
answer and we animate away the
difference between your answer and
reality and it turns out I was a pretty
terrible guess sighs how about the next
question this is asking about what the
average ages to the age of which half
the population are younger and half the
population are older and I thought 35
that sounds middle-aged to me actually
an excerpt is incredibly young and I'd
underestimated the impact of the
university in this area the questions
get harder as you go through so this
one's now asking about home ownership
for every 100 households how many are
owned with a mortgage or loan and I
hedged my bets here because I didn't
want to be more than 50 out on the
answer and actually these get harder
these questions because when you're in
an area when you're in a community
things like age it's pretty you know
there are clues to whether a population
is old or young just by looking around
the area you can see something like home
ownership it's much more difficult to
see and so we revert to our own
heuristics their own biases about how
many people we think own their own homes
now the truth is when we publish this
quiz the census data that it's based on
was already a few years old we've had
online applications that allow you to
put in a post code and get statistics
back for years so in some senses this
was all a little bit old and not
necessarily new but I was interested to
see what reaction we might get by
gamifying the data in the way that we
have by using animation and playing on
the fact that people have their own
preconceptions and it turns out my
reaction was was more than I could have
hoped for it was a long-held ambition of
mine to bring down a statistics web site
due to public them all
this URL contains the word statistics
Garzon UK which is three of people's
least favourite words in a URL and the
amazing thing about was this was that
the website came down at quarter to
10:00 at night because people were
actually engaging with this data if
their own free will using their own
personal time and I was very interested
to see that we got something like
quarter of a million people playing the
quiz within the space of 48 hours of
launching it and it sparked an enormous
discussion online on social media which
was largely dominated by people having
fun with their misconceptions which is
something that you know I couldn't have
hoped really better in some respects I
also liked the fact that people started
sending it to politicians how well do
you know the area you claim to represent
and then just to finish going back to
the two kinds of people I thought it
would be really interesting to see how
people who are good with numbers would
do on this quiz the national
statistician of England and Wales John
Pillinger you would expect he would be
pretty good
he got 44 for his own area Jeremy Paxman
admittedly after a glass of wine
36 even worse okay it just shows you
that the numbers can inspire us all they
can surprise us all so very often we
talk about statistics as being a science
of uncertainty my parting pool for today
is actually statistics is the science of
us and that's why we should be
fascinated by numbers thank you very
much
[Applause]
you